---
title: "Moving to Seattle and buying a home virtually"
permalink: /blog/moving-to-seattle-buying-home-virtually/
categories:
- technical-writing
keywords:
rebrandly: https://idbwrtng.com/moving-strategies
description: "Many people are moving out of California right now for a variety of reasons. The main reason is that the cost of living is hard to justify during the work-from-home model of the pandemic. Other reasons include the constant fires, leading to poor air quality, the high state income taxes, the long, congested commutes, and more. You can read many articles about an exodus from Silicon Valley. This post isn't about the merits of California but is instead a more personal post about moving to Seattle and how to look for houses virtually. One question I explore is whether you can use virtual tools to adequately assess and buy a house that you've never actually seen."
---


## A little backstory

I've lived in various places in the world. I grew up in Burlington and Tacoma Washington. Then moved to Utah for college, then Japan for a summer, then New York City for graduate school. After New York City, we moved to Cairo, Egypt, for a couple of years before returning to Florida, where my sister and family were living. In Florida, thinking we would stay a long time, we bought a new house in a less-than-desirable neighborhood and lived there for several years before moving due to safety issues. (A drug-dealer shootout in a back alley with a bullet straying into my daughter's room, followed by a robbery the following week, prompted us to move to Utah for a better family environment.) We sold the Florida house at a loss and ended up paying the difference over the next couple of years.

After renting for a couple of years in Utah, we bought a house in Eagle Mountain, which is a suburb about a half-hour below Salt Lake City. The house's basement wasn't finished, as is common with houses there, and we spent a good year trying to finish that basement. I realized that I wasn't any sort of handyman and dreaded working down there. But Utah was good to us, and it was great to be so close to my wife's family while many of her siblings were near. Eventually, though, the organization I was working for had a huge layoff and sent the whole tech comm team packing. With a generous severance package, we decided to move out of state to a better job market.

We had three locations we were considering: San Francisco, Seattle, or Austin. Because I'd grown up in Washington, I still wanted to see the world and experience other places like California. I made a trip out to California to meet with a few companies, and the following week received a job offer. A couple of weeks later, we loaded up a Uhaul and drove out to California. Similar to leaving Florida, we were also unable to sell our house in Utah, but instead of selling it for a loss this time, we decided to rent it out, contracting with a management agency to handle the renting, repairs, and other details. This turned out to be a good decision.

Arriving in California with our Uhaul and trailer, we rented a motel room for a week in San Mateo as we looked for a place to rent. This all happened pretty quickly (the layoff, move, packing, and Uhaul trip out west), and we were naive about how competitive the rental market was in California. We were horrified to see lines of people and stacks of applications for nearly every rental property we visited. We thought having a large family would make us less desirable renters (because kids can be rough on a house), so we often told the kids to wait in the car. But it turns out families mean stability, and we luckily found a single-family home to rent in Santa Clara. (My wife also made a pleading case to the landlord, who seemed to have a soft heart for families.)

Santa Clara is a beautiful area, close to many big tech companies and opportunities. I biked to work my entire time here for the three companies I worked for &mdash; Badgeville in Redwood City, 41st Parameter (now Experian) in Santana Row (San Jose), and then Amazon in Sunnyvale. California's weather allows you to ride year-round, and the Caltrain line (combined with the bike) allows you to get almost anywhere in the Bay.

The price you pay for living in California, though, is the challenging housing market. We rented a 1,100 sq foot 3 bedroom single-family home in a good neighborhood for about $3,100 for 7 years before moving to another house that was 1,700 sq feet for $3,900. Both places had lots of applicants and we were lucky to get the rentals. Although we were renting and essentially throwing the money away each month, we rationalized it by remembering the two houses we bought that didn't go so well &mdash; buying a house wasn't always a good financial investment. The ability to walk away from a place any time you want is huge. Also, we were renting our house in Utah (though not quite breaking even) and growing equity, so that made renting more palatable.

## Tired of renting

When you have four kids, you tend to make deep hooks in an area. In California, our children made friends, joined sports clubs, got enmeshed in schools, and so on, which made it more difficult to move. You don't want to tell your children that they will probably never see their close friends again. But being a renter also tends to wear on you after a while. We wanted to live in a house that we would be in forever, that we could call our own. I've made so many small fixes in rentals that were frustrating. Every time I needed to switch a doorknob or faucet (any simple repair), I realized that the owner had purchased the cheapest possible part, and the door or kitchen area, being old from a 70-plus-year-old house, had warped wood or stripped holes for door screws or other issues. The easiest repair was often challenging. If I owned my home, I reasoned, things would be different.

The house we're currently renting in California costs 1.4 million on Zillow, but this same house anywhere else would probably be worth a third of this amount or less. If you've ever done the math on the down payment and monthly mortgage payments on a 1.4 million-dollar house, you can see how unrealistic this is. After a 300,000 down payment, you'd also be paying about $6,300 a month in mortgage. This wasn't feasible for us. Plus, how would it feel to spend a million dollars on a house that definitely did not feel like a million dollar house? None of us wanted to move into the kind of place we could actually afford to buy in California (e.g., a rundown two-bedroom condo in an undesirable part of San Jose or Gilroy).

## Decisions

About two months ago, our renter in Utah broke her lease and moved out early. This presented a decision and opportunity for us. We were faced with the question of whether to rent the house out again or try to sell it. The housing market is hot right now, with a lot of people shifting around locations and housing. Interest rates are also at a record low. We decided to sell the Utah house and made a profit this time. With the profit from the sale, we had the money for a down payment on a house in Seattle, and combined with other equity savings, we felt we could buy a house. But where in Seattle? We'd never actually lived in Seattle. What neighborhoods were good for families? What areas were affordable? Which areas had the best commute to downtown?

Trying to buy a house in a remote area is challenging. Although I grew up in Tacoma and Burlington, this was back in the early 90s. And I wasn't familiar with Seattle and commuting options. We made a list of essential requirements the house had to satisfy:

* Be in a 6+ school district
* Be within 1 hr commute to downtown Fremont area
* Be within our budget
* Be within 5 miles of a premier soccer club

(This last requirement is because one of my kids is in a competitive soccer club and so we wanted to find an equivalent.)

I used [http://mymaps.google.com/](http://mymaps.google.com/) to start adding points on a map. First I added in commute lines, and then soccer clubs, then school districts. Here's my [map](https://www.google.com/maps/d/edit?mid=13y5p7eH25rcvThSGTJJ6FQ9hzmGb32AX&ll=47.60077289221732%2C-122.33059924940586&z=12):

<iframe src="https://www.google.com/maps/d/embed?mid=13y5p7eH25rcvThSGTJJ6FQ9hzmGb32AX" width="640" height="480"></iframe>

(Here's a [static image of the map](https://s3.us-west-1.wasabisys.com/idbwmedia.com/images/mapseattlemove.png).)

Commute lines include the Link Light Rail and Sounder, for the most part. (Bus routes are everywhere but too complicated to add.) The soccer clubs are all the "premier" clubs as listed on [Washington Youth Soccer](https://washingtonyouthsoccer.org/find-a-club/#) in the Seattle area.

Adding single data points on a map is easy, but adding school boundaries is much more difficult. Schools don't often have a boundary file (in KML file format) that you can download and import into your own map. Zillow gets its school boundary data from Pitney Bowes, which isn't a free site. Although it's tough to get these school boundaries, the information is crucial when you have several children.

To add the school boundaries to my custom map, I took a screenshot from the district boundaries identified by Zillow, then superimposed the image onto the same area in Google Earth Pro, traced the area with the polygon tool in its own layer, and then saved it as a KML file. I then imported this KML file onto a layer on my custom map. At first this method seemed cumbersome, but I soon became good at it.

With the areas and other features identified on our custom map, we could then add any address from Zillow and immediately evaluate it based on proximity to our requirements: the commute line, soccer club, school, and downtown workplace. Browsing Zillow is both fun and addictive, so this filled many evening hours and family discussions. Each time our children would wander in to see us browsing Zillow, it filled them with dread and they said "We're not moving!" But eventually, they warmed to the idea and started to get excited about it. Even my second oldest child, who has many close friends, said she was excited about the move.

I also explored some of the places on Zillow using virtual reality (VR). With my Oculus Go headset, I opened up the [Wander app](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/go/1887977017892765/?locale=en_US), said the address I wanted to see, and then explored it. (BTW, some houses on Zillow also offer VR tours of the inside, which is super fun to explore. But most do not.) Exploring the world through VR turns out to be quite an experience, especially when there are different timelines available for a house. Seeing the same house in 2008, 2011, and 2018 can be eye-opening. You can also see the neighborhoods as you traverse up and down the streets, which isn't something you can easily do in Zillow. (I can't believe that Zillow doesn't partner with Wander or some other app because it would make for a killer app experience.)

The one problem with the VR exploration is that getting the address required some painful context switching. Zillow doesn't have a VR app, so I had to constantly take the headset off to read an address on Zillow, and then put the VR headset back on to say the address in Wander. One evening, this switching on and off suddenly made me sick and I felt nauseated for hours. The headset is immersive, and constantly taking it on and off is jarring on the brain. Even so, I loved exploring the world in VR and would often click the Random button in Wander and try to guess where I ended up in the world.

With these experiments, I started to wonder if it was possible to gather the same info about a remote area using VR as it would be to visit the place in person. The VR gives you a 360-degree view and lets you move about in a somewhat free way. It really does feel like you're there. However, eventually we decided to make an actual trip out to Seattle to visit the key neighborhoods that we identified. (This was before the tighter lockdown.) Some of the top area contenders were Shoreline, Edmonds, West Seattle, Wallingford, Kent, Puyallup, Sumner, and Silverdale.

We spent 4 days driving around everywhere in Seattle and surrounding areas. The first day, as we were driving around downtown Seattle in a rented Ford Fusion, it became immediately clear to me that downtown areas like Wallingford and West Seattle would not work. Driving in the narrow, one-way streets filled me with anxiety and tension. We checked out a few condos (the only affordable living options). Parking a minivan in these areas would be nearly impossible. Even in places that offered garage parking, the gymnastics required to get in and out of these spaces required more driving agility than I possessed. The only feasible way to live in the city would be to mostly walk everywhere and take public transportation, but I didn't see how this would work with a family, commuting to soccer practices.

The next day we drove out to Kent and I felt like I could breathe again. Beautiful, tall trees with autumn-colored leaves, as well as spacious single-family homes, dotted the picturesque landscape. We also explored Puyallup and Sumner, which also seemed great but more farmland-y and much more disconnected from Seattle (not just a bedroom commute area). As we explored various houses and neighborhoods, I had a stark realization that I didn't realize with VR: the closer you get to commute lines, the worse the neighborhoods typically are. Few areas have good school districts right next to Sounder stations. Nicer houses in more family-friendly areas are invariably more distant from commute stations and transit areas (with a few pricey exceptions). So you could either choose a nice house in a good school district or a convenient commute, but not both (within our budget). This is the essential dilemma &mdash; a nice house in a great neighborhood, or getting to work more efficiently. We hoped to find a middle ground.

During our Seattle trip, we also explored Silverdale, which is across the Puget Sound in the Kitsap Peninsula and requires an hour-long ferry ride. The idea of living on an island and commuting by ferry seemed really appealing, but when we got out there, Silverdale seemed to consist of chain stores and franchises, and was about three blocks in length. The houses were either staggered on a hill (for the views) or deep in the woods (for privacy). I also realized that while I like more drivable, suburban areas, I didn't like to be so remote that the roads transitioned into single-lane dirt roads winding around dark woodsy corners. Also, I noticed that the farther out you go, the more Trump-Pence signs you see. And much of the wilderness areas there are actually restricted zones from the nearby naval base.

On the last day we drove again around Kent and Renton and tried to get a feel for the areas. I did a test drive from a house we liked to the Sounder station to gauge the time. In conducting these experiments, I realized that biking to these transit stations (like I did in California) probably wouldn't work. Few roads had shoulders, and the weather wasn't great for riding, and some hills were massive. (In VR, the weather looks sunny most of the time.)

My wife fell in love with a house that literally had a dozen fir trees in the backyard. We met a buyers agent and put an offer on the house, but didn't get it. Another house we looked at sat on 1.5 acres, with about 7 sheds on the property. The listing agent told us that during the past two weeks, she had met 8 different couples from California looking for properties in the area. She said they almost all wanted the same thing &mdash; a house secluded by trees with a lot of privacy. I certainly didn't want 7 sheds in a long backyard, and actually I cared much less about privacy than others. But hearing the listing agent tell us about the droves of California buyers was unnerving. The fear that everyone was moving from California into this area to buy a house dawned on us, and we started to panic a bit. What if corona-virus trends continued and more people moved out of California? What if we ended up being among the last people left in California, still paying nearly $4k a month in rent to show up to a mostly empty office (in the spring) with everyone else is working virtually? What if the thousands of new Amazon hires &mdash; who are initially remote but then commit to relocating to Seattle post-pandemic &mdash; all make the move to Seattle at the same time, causing a complete shortage of housing?

It's hard to make predictions about life after the pandemic. Many WFH-champions hope that this period spent working from home will help tech companies realize how successful and productive they can be in this model. Others dread working from home and long to return to the office. Others argue for more of a hybrid model. Personally, I'm in the return-to-work camp. I like the rhythms of going into an office in the morning and returning in the evening, even if the commute is tiring. The fact that I have four children at home adds to the challenge of working at home, though my youngest is 10 and so not as challenging as younger children.

After Seattle, we returned to California and continued our hunt virtually. However, now that we had a Washington-based buyer's agent (required for the house we put an offer on), we had more exploratory power. We would tell her an address we wanted to see, and she would make a trip out there either the same day or next, then proceed to do a walkthrough with her smartphone using FaceTime so we could see the video. She also assessed the neighborhood and house and would let us know whether it was a good deal or not based on her knowledge of the market and area.

After a couple of weeks of this, we put an offer on a home in Renton that seemed to satisfy our requirements, and it was accepted. It's a beautiful home, as far as we can tell. We still have never seen the home in person but will be moving there later this month. We have looked at the pictures on Zillow countless times and explored the exterior and neighborhood again and again on different maps and in VR and FaceTime. Will it be our dream home, or will we arrive only to be disappointed and stuck in a place we dislike for years? Only time will tell. I likely won't experience the full reality of the commute until next summer. Even so, knowing that we're moving, leaving California, pulling up roots and moving to Washington, is comforting and gives us something to look forward to.

Overall, this experience caused me to reflect on virtual versus physical experiences. How much can you infer through virtual tools (including VR) about an area without actually visiting it? As we WFH, we learned that we can work virtually and be just as productive, interacting with people we've never actually met in person. Tech companies are thriving in the pandemic. But can you also buy a house and make large decisions about moving too? How many really big decisions can be made using virtual tools alone? Looking back, I think virtual exploration got us about halfway there, but it wasn't until we toured the areas that we could make more definitive decisions. As we pack up and prepare to move, though, I am definitely keeping my VR headset and plan to keep exploring the world, even if the full experience of the areas is limited.
