---
title: "Trends to follow or forget (part 1)"
permalink: /blog/2022-02-23-trends-to-follow-or-forget1.html
categories:
- technical-writing
keywords:
rebrandly: https://idbwrtng.com/trendstofolloworforget1
description: "first in series of 3"
published: false
---


## Intro

Wanted to look at failed trends. Initial survey suggested there are no failed trends, we just keep adding more and more trends under the tech comm umbrella. So instead, i want to take you on a tour through all of the trends i’ve embraced and rejected over my past 18 years as a technical writer. Because I like to experiment and innovate with trends, I feel like I’m a microcosm of the tech comm trend line.

Note: I’m not arguing that any of these are failed trends. It’s more like my journey through a trend line.

Later, at the end, I’ll try to draw some learning from these various trends that could potentially be useful in evaluating new trends and practices. What principles can you use to follow or forget a trend?


## Help-authoring tools (HATs)

As the web became the new standard for information delivery and consumption, desktop authoring tools like Framemaker, designed for print publications, phased out in favor of help authoring tools (HATs) that could generate web-based content. HATs provided an all-in-one website generation tool, complete with the left-hand navigation, search, expand/collapse folders, and more. You could easily deploy the entire HAT output on the web, without knowing anything about HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. When I entered the field back in 2005, the industry-standard HAT was RoboHelp. Later tools included Flare (spun off from the RoboHelp team), HelpNManual, Author-it, WebWorks, and more. HATs almost invariably worked only on a PC, and their tripane help output was clearly recognizable because the tools allowed for only minimal branding.

**Why I embraced HATs: **As a new tech writer, I joined a company that used RoboHelp as its standard tool. It did make authoring easy. RoboHelp was soon surpassed by MadCap Flare, which continued the same paradigm but improved it in many ways. When I switched companies, I was free to choose my own authoring tool and chose MadCap Flare. Two of my colleagues later went on to become Flare consultants and built up small freelance businesses around their Flare expertise, one of which is still going strong today.

**Why I abandoned HATs: **The context in which I was writing documentation changed. After I left my first company (that used RoboHelp as its standard), I started working for another organization that had a strong community effort, with lots of volunteers eager to help out by writing content. I needed a platform that would allow this wider community to create and share content in a scalable, free way. In short, I needed a wiki.

**Current status of HATs:** HATs are still popular, though there aren’t as many options as previously. MadCap Flare won the HAT battle, more or less. Flare is used by a huge number of technical writers who prefer to focus more on content than building out their own toolchain workflow and website framework. Even so, not many HATS are used for API documentation, in part because of the lack of support for API reference documentation). MadCap has expanded their toolset to include a suite of tools, not just a HAT. They have a popular conference every year with a loyal, thriving user base.


## Wikis

Wikis allow for larger numbers of people to contribute and edit content. Open-source wikis like Mediawiki (the same platform powering Wikipedia) scales in an impressive way to allow practically anyone to contribute. Wikis support crowdsourcing information models, which is the idea that you no longer need a dedicated team of writers; instead, the content can be contributed by many different people, just like Wikipedia. If 100 people each contribute a few paragraphs here and there, you’ve suddenly created the bulk of your docs without the need for tech writers. Or at the very least, the efforts of tech writers can be magnified and enhanced through contributions and refinements from community members.

**Why I embraced wikis and crowdsourcing: **I was working for a company that had a large number of volunteers eager to contribute content. Wikis were the right tool for this scenario. Further, because MediaWiki was open source, we didn’t have any licensing issues for each contributor.

**Why I abandoned wikis and crowdsourcing:** Trying to crowdsource documentation from volunteers didn’t work. The most common reason people volunteered was to build up their portfolios and get more tech writing experience, so they needed a lot of handholding and direction. Most of the documentation tasks required access to internal project teams and information. It was hard to connect external volunteers with the needed inside information, especially given corporate access restrictions. Crowdsourcing really only works if you have simple tasks that don’t require much expertise. For those volunteers who did contribute content, it was often mediocre quality, and they didn’t take into consideration how their added paragraph or article flowed with the rest of the page content or surrounding product context. In the end, I expended a lot of effort trying to wrangle and manage volunteers, without much output or productivity. One day I measured up the time I spent managing and coordinating the volunteers versus the output and how long it would take me to produce the same content, and I decided the crowdsourcing model didn’t really work, so there was little point in continuing to use a wiki.

**Current status of wikis and crowdsourcing: **Wikis are still going strong in internal contexts, such as for corporate platforms. Confluence is practically the de facto infrastructure for many companies. But as far as a doc platform for external docs, as well as crowdsourcing models, I don’t see too many examples outside of Confluence. Even if Confluence is used for external docs, the docs don’t always give outsiders the ability to edit the content. As far as crowdsourcing goes, making the docs available on GitHub and allowing people to submit pull requests is now more common. Even so, the GitHub model of pull requests never worked for me either.


## Faceted filtering

Faceted filtering is a technique you often see on sites that sell physical products (e.g., shoes, clothing); on these sites, the faceted filters allow you to select various options to narrow down what you want to find. For example, you might select filters such as styles, gender, age, sizes, colors, etc. to narrow down the results as you’re looking for a new pair of running shoes. I wanted to implement the same faceted filtering paradigm with docs, allowing users to narrow the content down by operating system, location, version, feature, context, popularity, and more. I used a tool called semantic mediawiki that allowed me to add semantic data to wiki pages and then create advanced queries that would sort the topics by the semantic values. I created various sortings of docs, presented the sortings on the homepage and allowed users to choose the entry point that made the most sense for them.

**Why I embraced faceted filtering: **At the time, I was trying to unlock the key to findability, and I was drawn in by the faceted filtering patterns on sites like Amazon and elsewhere. The web was still maturing, and patterns on these sites provided a clearly superior experience. Further, the semantic web was much discussed and hyped at this time. The semantic web promised to enrich content with semantics (especially through microformats) in ways that would improve discoverability. XML was the driving technology behind the semantic web. Faceted filters would simply leverage the semantic-laden attributes to make it easier to find what you were looking for. Microformats were one of the key strategies driving the semantic web.

**Why I abandoned faceted filtering: **Providing a custom set of filters for navigation was never an out-of-the-box product that was easy to implement without engineering support. Further, having multiple presentations of content topics confused users, as this wasn’t a standard pattern in documentation. There also weren’t a clear set of facets by which to sort informational content like there are with physical products. Also, although you can create different ways to sort and present topics, when a user goes to a page, there can be only one sidebar shown on the left. So if you have a list of the most popular topics, when viewing that topic as a single page, the sidebar wouldn’t list other popular topics but likely show the page in context of another organization pattern (such as grouping by topic).

**Current status of faceted filtering:** Some more robust documentation tools, such as Fluid Topics, allows users to sort content using faceted filters, but only using the conditional profiling filters provided through DITA. Tech comm tools never really delivered on this faceted filtering pattern. Faceted filters are still frequently used with merchandise sites, but you don’t see too many examples with documentation sites that go beyond the basic filters (such as version, language, or platform). Although DITA XML allows for filters in the outputs, the more common DITA tooling pattern is to generate separate outputs based on profile conditions, not provide toggles to filter content within the same output. Providing the filters within the same output is a much more advanced, complex undertaking. On the other hand, providing separate outputs for each type of user is traditionally a print paradigm.


## Screencasting

Screencasts are short videos that show how to do a specific task (usually in a software application). They’re usually recorded using a tool such as Camtasia Studio, last between 30 seconds to several minutes, and often include a voice providing commentary and instruction to complement the visual experience.

**Why I embraced screencasting: **Screencasts rose in popularity as YouTube came of age and people started promoting video as the primary form of instruction that the younger generation preferred (over text). I created a ton of screencasts for software applications I was documenting. I was also getting into podcasting at the time, and podcasting seemed like a close cousin to screencasting, as it involved much of the same audio techniques. I even took private lessons from a voiceover professional in hopes of improving my audio techniques. (I learned how hard voiceover actually is.)

**Why I abandoned screencasting: **As I moved into developer documentation, screencasts became less popular and relevant. At the first company where I started writing developer docs, I also did a series of code-tutorial videos. The product managers were ecstatic to have some code-tutorial videos, but almost no users watched them or seemed to want them (according to the analytics). With developer docs, having code samples was more helpful than videos. Code just doesn’t work great in screencasts. Screencasts work best with visually rich software interfaces, where it helps to see different elements on a screen. Further, many developers said they loathed videos because the medium didn’t allow them to easily scan and locate content. For them, it was an experience of having to patiently wait for a video to proceed while the developer waited/hoped/wondered if the narrator would get to a relevant detail that would address a specific question or concern.

**Current status of screencasting: **Screencasts are still popular, especially for non-writers providing tips and tutorials on YouTube. Video has gained a lot of popularity for tutorial sites like Linkedin Learning (formerly Lynda.com), Safari Books, and other sites that teach users from the ground up. However, video-based documentation didn’t replace text-based documentation. Video continues to be time-consuming to create and inflexible to update over time. Agile development makes video content go out of date rather quickly. Tech writers tend to be understaffed already, and the effort required to create screencasts often doesn’t match their time availability or interest. Corporations expect professional-grade results (rather than the many amateurish but still helpful videos on YouTube) yet don’t want to invest the time or resources (such as providing a dedicated recording studio on site). Additionally, many tech writers are more keen to write copy instead of engage in multimedia anyway. For documentation that is highly technical, screencasts tend to fail. Screencasts work better for simpler content that can be explained in plain language.


## Quick reference guides

Quick reference guides refer to short 1-2 page guides, attractively formatted often in multi-column layouts, that get users going with succinct descriptions of the key tasks in a software application. The idea is that users almost universally resist slogging through a long user manual and instead prefer to get up and running quickly. They often need only minimal amounts of information to get started; the rest they might figure out on their own through trial and experimentation. These quick reference guides could be printed and distributed to users at conferences, during training, attached to newsletters, or delivered in other contexts.

**Why I embraced quick reference guides: **Although I was delivering documentation through online formats, we still wanted to give the user something to get started. At the time, the popularity of video further marginalized the role of text, especially long text-based manuals, and so this quick reference format allowed us to reduce text but still provide instruction for users to get started. Most PMs loved the quick reference guides I created. One PM told me that he actually cried the first time he saw the quick reference guide I delivered – he finally felt that tech writers understood that no one wants to read long volumes of documentation.

**Why I abandoned quick reference guides: **Quick reference guides were always considered icing on the cake – not part of the core deliverables, just something extra that we provided. Instead of providing these 1-2 page PDFs, I instead gravitated more towards getting started tutorials, which could be delivered online with the rest of docs, weren’t confined to a highly styled and formatted print layout, and could include more detail, especially code samples that wouldn’t normally fit within a print layout.

**Current status: **Nearly every gadget I buy seems to come with a quick start guide, or some shorter 2-3 page setup guide rather than a long reference manual. Providing this shorter guide seems to be a common standard for many products. Within developer docs, the getting started tutorial is much more common, and it’s rarely something intended to be printed. Making information fit a print-based format often didn’t work well because most tech writers phased out of desktop publishing tools (e.g., InDesign), and wanted to put the content within the same web output as their other docs. When you put the quick reference guide online, it’s easy to simply link out to topics for more detail rather than trying to condense and summarize the information into a 1-2 page guide.
